Mainframes are the original general idea of what a computer was in the seventies and eighties. They weren’t called mainframes in the beginning because they were all we knew of what a computer was. Unlike personal computers, which were originally termed “micro-computers,” to contrast them with these large and powerful machines of academic and government computing, mainframes are for all intents and purposes, a single machine that multiple people log into to do computing work. The most common operating system for mainframes is UNIX. UNIX is similar to Linux because Linux was based on UNIX, but designed to run on PCs instead of mainframes. Mainframes and PCs use slightly different architectures for their CPUs—the computer’s heart and brain, and this is the greatest technical difference between PCs and mainframes.

Mainframe, or UNIX machines have terminals that are used to connect to them. Terminals look like what we think of as computers—a display, keyboard and (today) a mouse. But there is no sizable box connected to them as there would be with a PC. They are connected to a small box (the size of a modem) or directly to a network connection (today generally a category 5 or 6 cable which looks like a very thick phone cable).

In the late nineties, these machines acquired graphical interfaces thanks to software called “X Windows”. Soon X Windows software could not only run on a terminal, it could run on any PC that could connect to a mainframe, like any other PC application.

Mainframes are very powerful. They are what we are referring to when we say “super-computer.” Mainframes are most commonly found in universities, large colleges, large businesses and government organizations.